(Intro music)
Let's talk about scope.
We've talked a little bit about scope
through the last couple of videos
because it is sort of hard to know anything about variables
without slightly touching on it
but let's now get into the nitty gritty
and hopefully get a really good understanding
of how scope works, so what is scope?
Scope answers the question:
where are my variables and functions available to me?
We've been making functions, we've been making variables and
generally they have been available anywhere we want them
but we have seen some issues where,
if you create a variable inside of a function
then they are not available outside of that function
that is what scope is, so let's go in to understanding
the different types of scope
and how we can figure out scope look-up is
and this thing called hoisting
and lots of good stuff to learn here
so let's first make... lets go to the playground folder
and make a new file called scope dot html
I'm going to use my html base inside of there
and let's give ourself the script source to
let's call it scope dot js
and let's go ahead and make that file
go to the playground, new file, scope dot js and console log
it works.
Let's open up scope dot html in the browser,
it works!
All right, so lets talk about the first type of scope
which is what are called "global variables".
Global variables are if you have a script tag
or a JavaScript file or you run it in the console
and anytime you declare a variable
its gonna be available anywhere in your application
so case in point if I do something like this
const first is equal to wes
and I go in here and just type in 'first'
its available to me there
and also if I were to go into a script tag right on the page
and we just console dot log
first
is that going to work? Is that going to be undefined?
What is that going to be?
Its wes.
Why?
Because when you just go ahead and create a variable
in a JavaScript file
while not inside of a function, not inside of a module,
not inside of an if statement,
when you just create it out in the open.
That is what is referred to as a global variable
and you can access them from any other JavaScript that's
running on the page like a script tag or via the console
In the browser the global scope is called the window.
If you go ahead in your browser
and just type in window and then open that up,
you'll see that there is actually everything
that is attached to the global scope is inside the window.
That's why sometimes you gonna see people saying things like
window dot set timeout or set interval, we looked at that
and there is also just regular, old setTimeout.
Those are both the exact same thing so methods that are
globally available to us like setTimeout
they are actually on the window object
and that is what is called global.
There is like one thing you should know about const and let
is that if I make a , lets turn off eslint
eslint disable
and I make a let second equals bos
and I make a var age equals a hundred
if I go in here and I type in first, good
second, good, then age
those are all global variables, however, if you type in
window dot first you get undefined
window dot second you get undefined
and then window dot age, you actually get a hundred.
And that is because var variables are attached to the
window object and they are globally scoped
and const and let variables, when declared like this
they are still globally scoped,
they are just not attached to the window.
That's not really all that important
because as we are going to learn
you probably shouldn't be doing this anyway
you shouldn't be making global variables
it's sort of a recipe for a headache
but that's just to show you that sometimes
you are going to see people saying, window dot
and sometimes you are going to see people typing
the global variable directly,
and that's because anything that is global,
especially the built in methods are just attached to it
so the same thing with functions,
if I make a function called "say hi" and you console log
hi
we can run it from here
let's do it, say hi
it works! You can run it from here
its available there
you can also run it by saying window dot say hi
why is it available at window dot say hi?
Because anything that is in the global scope
is attached to the window object
with the exception of
const and let variables
but functions, when declared globally
are available inside of the window.
Now, in saying that, in almost all use cases
using global scope isn't a good idea
but before we discuss why it isn't a good idea
let's learn about how the different parts of scope work
so let's back this up here,
let's get rid of the script tag here
let's remove everything inside of there
and let's say const age is equal to one hundred
make a function called go
and say const hair is equal to blonde
and then we'll go down here and we'll console log age
and we'll console log hair.
So what do you think is gonna run?
When I console log age is it going to be a hundred?
And when I console log hair is it going to be blonde?
Let's see.
A hundred, good.
And uncaught reference error hair is not defined.
Okay, or maybe it's because I didn't run the go function,
I just defined it,
lets run the go function so that variable gets declared.
Hair is not defined, same problem!
Well, what's going on here?
So this is the next type of scope
which is called function scope.
What function scope is
is when variables are created inside of a function
those variables are only ever available
inside of that function.
Meaning that anything that we create inside of this function
is not available outside of that function
unless we were to explicitly return it
and put it into its own variable when that function is run.
So if I go, put this console log here,
and I put that inside here
we're going to get blonde, right there.
Why? Because this variable is inside of here
but it is not available down here because these are...
I always like to think of these curly brackets
as sort of like fences. These fences, whenever you see them
they keep the variables in
and do not allow them to leak out.
Now, is that the same for the opposite?
If I were to go in... let's put that hair back inside
but if I were to also console log the age
if variables can't leak out, can they go in?
And yes they can.
So this is kind of interesting about JavaScript
and this is how most programming languages work is that
this is something called the scope look-up
that we are going to look at in just a second but this...
Variables if not found inside of a function,
will go up a level higher
and look for a variable in that scope
and if it's not available in that scope
it'll go up a level higher.
We'll talk about multiple nested scope in just a second
but what happens here is that when it's looking for age
it says "oh!,
there is no variable inside of this function called age,
so I'll go up one more level and look for that."
Now, if I were to do this, const age is equal to two hundred
and get rid of this
what is it gonna be now?
Is that gonna be an error?
Is that going to be a
two hundred
or is it gonna be one hundred?
It's two hundred.
First of all, is that allowed?
And second of all, why is it two hundred?
Well, first let's do the second question first here
let's console log age
and you see that it looks in the local function first
and it does find a variable called age
and therefore, that's the variable it needs
however, if not found,
it'll go up a level higher and look for that value.
So, that's kind of interesting
Why is this allowed?
Why is this not breaking?
Even if I hover over it
it says, age is already declared in the upper scope.
That's what's referred to as shadow variables
so you can name variables the same thing
if they are not in the same scope
however, it's not a good idea
because if you name a variable the same thing
as something that is in another scope,
you've just limited yourself to being able to access that
so if I wanted to now access this one hundred age,
there is absolutely no way I could do that
because the variable has been shadowed
which means its been over-written,
which is legal but is not allowed
so if you ever have a variable that is outside of a function
and you need to have another variable
that is kind of the same thing inside of a function,
just create a better named variable inside of it
just in case you ever need to reach outside out of it
so I am using my age is equal to that
now age is a hundred
and I could just change this one to be my age
there you go
one hundred and two hundred
I can access both of them.
Let's talk about the next one which is blocked scope.
So remember earlier we talked about var, let and const
let me comment this out here
var, let and const variables are scoped differently
we talked about how const variables can't be re-assigned
and let and var variables can be re-assigned
they have a different way of how they are scoped.
We'll go in here and say if one is equal to one
obviously one is equal to one, so that will be true
then we'll make a variable const cool is equal to true
go down here
console log cool
when I run that, is it going to work?
Reference error, cool is not defined.
Why not?
Well, what if I make that a var?
It works!
What id I make it a let?
I've got me eslint helping me out there,
eslint disable
No, let doesn't work either
so what's happening here is that whenever you have
a set of curly brackets,
that is what is referred to as a block
now blocks were showing up in lots of places,
probably the most common is an if statement
we'll see lots more examples of what blocks are
but essentially whenever you see these blocks
these curly brackets
you can think of them as gates
and those gates like to keep variables in
anytime something that was inside of these gates,
they are not allowed to leave those gates
so if you need to access a variable
that was created inside of the gates
outside of the gates
you simply are not allowed to do it
so some solutions to that
every now and then I do run into a situation
where I do need a variable to be available
outside of a block
what happens is that you have to create a variable above it
so we'll say let cool
and then here we just simply do not declare it
but we update that variable
and what that does is that it creates is in the higher scope
in this case its the global variable
and we'll look at if this was created inside our function
it would be function scoped
then we update the variable here
and then it's available to us
so there we go it's now true
now that probably won't be a global variable
it would most likely be any function called, "isCool"
and then inside of that, it will look like this
now this is where we are starting
to get into two different kind of scopes
so we return
cool.
Lets actually make this a little bit...
Name, and then we'll say
"if the person's name is equal to wes
cool is equal to true
then we return cool.
So what's going on here is that we have one scope
which is called a function scope
and that is open with this block
kind of the confusing thing here is that a function
also has a block
and so any let, const or var variables are automatically
scoped to a function
because regardless of if its a function or a block
it's still a set of curly brackets, so it's scoped to that.
Then we go inside of here, and this is scoped so again
if I were to just make a const variable here
and remove that,
this is not going to be available to us
so is cool
wes
cool is not defined
but if I were to do something like this
let cool,
then update it
then return it
it works.
Which is good for us.
So that is the idea of what blocked scoping is
is anytime yo have a set of curly brackets
and most likely its going to be an if statement
but we are going to run into a lot of other
different situations
this is not really a hindrance
I know I showed you how to solve it here
but in most cased this is going to be really nice
because you don't have to worry
about variables leaking out of it
in the past we've had um! Like what are called for loops
so we'll have something that looks like this
"for
var i is equal to zero"
i is
less than ten
i plus plus",
we'll go over what this is in the future
and then right here what we'll do is
we will console log "i"
so watch what happens here
we get zero through nine
and if I were just to go and type "i" now
we get this like random variable that's just out floating
in outer space called, "i"
this increment here
it should only be available to this loop
and for some reason now because there was a "var"
now its leaked outside
and now we have like this random i variable on
if you ever need to like go ahead and make another for loop
and you already have another "i" variable on
that can cause bugs in future
so by simply just making it a let
it works the same and now there is no "i" variable
see "i" is not defined.
So that's beautiful
because it's then scoped to the curly brackets.
So, big fan of blocked scoping
I think that's why most people say
always use "const" by default,
"let" when you need to re-assign it
and don't use "var"
unless there is any specific use case for it.
Actually one more thing I should show you here is that...
also this function "isCool"
could also be solved by just doing this "var"
and watch this now, wes
it still works.
Why?
Because when I created this variable inside of this block
it was a "var" variable
and "var" variables are not block scoped,
they are function scoped.
So they are available outside of this
but they are only available inside of this function
so that's why I am able to console log cool
below this "if" statement
but if it was a "let" it would not work.
Let me show you one more time
here we go,
see, again make it a "var"
I think you get the point here
(chuckles)
"var" variables are function scoped
"let" and "const" variables are block scoped.
And that answers where they are available to you.
Let's do another example of some scope look-up
just to get that concept.
Down pad here
What I want to do is
lets make a variable called dog
and lets set that to "snickers"
and then we'll make a function called, "logDog"
which will simply just console log the dog's name.
Then I have a function
called go
and inside of that we make another dog variable
let's set that to "sunny"
and we'll call logDog.
And then we run go.
Okay, so what's going on here?
We have a variable called dog, set to snickers.
We have a function that will log a variable called dog.
Which doesn't.
Then we have a function called go,
which created a variable called dog again
named "sunny"
then we run that function and then we go ahead and run it.
So lets see, when we call this logDog function,
is it going to log "sunny"
or is it going to log "snickers"?
You might think it's going to log "sunny"
because we've declared the dog in this function scope
so when this function runs,
shouldn't it look in its own scope for that?
Or you might think
it's going to run snickers
because this function is declared here
there is obviously no "dog" variable inside of that function
and it will look-up for that.
So lets go ahead and run it, place your bets now
"snickers"
so even though I ran the function inside of this go function
and even though this go function
has a locally scoped variable called "sunny"
it still logged "snickers".
And this is because JavaScript is what is referred to as,
some buzzwords coming here,
Lexical scoping or static scoping
you're going to hear these words,
I don't know, thrown around
"its a lexically scoped language".
And what that means is that, simply,
the way that variable look-up or scope look-up happens
is where the functions are defined
not where they are run.
So even thought this function here
is run inside of another function which has a locally scoped
it doesn't care about where its run,
it cares about where it's defined.
So because this function here
is then console logging the dog
it was defined here so it will look up
it obviously doesn't have a local one named dog,
and then it will just go up one level.
So that's what you need to know about scope look-up.
Ideally this function wouldn't even look outside
of the function for that variable,
ideally, this function called "logDog"
would take in a variable called "dog"
and then you would pass in a variable called anything,
you can call it dog,
let's call it something else.
Let's call it, "Rufus".
Now what is it going to log?
Its... we log dog, we pass it a param...
we pass an argument called Rufus,
that parameter's name is dog so we console log dog
what's it going to be? Sunny, Snickers or Rufus?
Rufus. Why?
Because, what happens is that
when a function takes in an argument
it will make local variables inside of that function
named whatever you named the parameter.
And then that's available to it.
It's the same thing as doing something like this:
const dog is equal to whatever you passed in
as the first argument to the function.
JavaScript does that behind the scenes,
it will say "Okay,
lets make some local variables to this function."
Function scoped variables,
and it makes them all available to us
based on what we call it.
Now we could call that whatever we want,
but the fact that I'm passing in a dog variable here,
now this is going to get a little confusing here
it's Sunny,
it doesn't care what you call the variable
that you are passing in,
it just cares what the value is
so that is the same thing as just passing in
a string of
"Sunny".
So scope look-up is a little bit of a funky thing,
we're going to go through a lot more examples
and figuring out how it is
and also there is some sort of best practices
that we can go through in making sure that we don't get this
confusion here where you have variables
called the same thing that's inside of the function
that's just sort of a recipe for confusion
as well as a potential bugs
where you accidentally goof up scoping.
So let's talk about some best practices
for variables real quick.
First, try not to create global variables.
Its fine for us to create them as we're doing this
and when we get into what are called modules,
its actually almost impossible to create global variables
unless you have to explicitly do something like
window dot IAmAGlobal equals wes.
And then you can go into here, say IAmAGlobal
unless you explicitly attache is to the window
with a module, it very hard to create a global variable
and that is intentional
because having global variables can lead to bugs
down the road where you accidentally overlap things
I've been on projects before
where everybody used global variables
and someone named a global variable called twitter
and someone else thought twitter was a good variable name
as well and then those start to overlap each other
and before you know it things start breaking
because you are not expecting them to be
the values that you expect them to be.
So we will not go ahead and do that.
Lets talk about function scoping.
Functions are scoped the exact same as variables
so if you have a function here called "sayHi"
that takes in a name
and then you were to make another function inside of that
is that allowed?
Absolutely, and we'll look up some examples
of why you might want to do that.
So if you make a "yell" function inside of that
and you console log
the name dot to upper case
and then we run "yell"
if I were to run "sayHi"
wes,
it will yell wes.
So what's happening here
is that I've made a function called "sayHi"
and that inside of that I've made a function called "yell"
if I go down here and try to run "yell" directly
is it gonna work?
"yell" is not defined.
Why?
Because, just like variables,
functions are going to be scoped to the parent function.
So if you create a function, inside of another function,
that function will only ever be available inside of that
so that's getting a little ahead of ourselves,
that's starting to open up what is referred to as a closure
which is a little more of an advanced example
we'll go through it in this course for sure
but just to let you know that
it is possible to do a function inside of a function,
generally you are not going to be doing that though
generally you are just going to be doing functions
all at the top level
and then if you want to reference one function from another
that's absolutely fine.
I think that's enough for this example,
let's go jump into the next video and we will explain
hoisting.